
IPSEC Working Group                                            M. Myers
Internet-Draft                                  TraceRoute Security LLC
Expires: December 31, 2004                                H. Tschofenig
                                                                Siemens
                                                              July 2004


                        OCSP Extensions to IKEv2
                  draft-myers-ipsec-ikev2-oscp-00.txt

Status of this Memo

By submitting this Internet-Draft, I certify that any applicable
patent or other IPR claims of which I am aware have been disclosed,
and any of which I become aware will be disclosed, in accordance with
RFC 3668.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
other groups may also distribute working documents as
Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2004.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

While IKEv2 supports public key based authentication (PKI), the 
corresponding use of in-band CRLs is problematic due to unbounded CRL 
size.  The size of an OCSP response is however well-bounded and small.  
This document defines two extensions to IKEv2 which enable the use of 
OCSP for in-band signaling of certificate revocation status.  Two new 
content encodings are defined for use in the CERTREQ and CERT payloads:  
OCSP Responder Hash and OCSP Response.  An OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ 
payload triggers transmission of an OCSP Response CERT payload.







Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

1.  Introduction

Version 2 of the Internet Key Exchange protocol [IKEv2] supports a 
range of authentication mechanisms, including the use of public key 
based authentication (PKI).  Confirmation of certificate reliability is 
essential to achieve the security assurances PKI provides.  One 
fundamental element of such confirmation is reference to certificate 
revocation status (see [RFC3280] for additional detail).

The historic means of determining certificate revocation status is 
through the use of Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs).  IKEv2 allows 
CRLs to be exchanged in-band via the CERT payload.

CRLs can however grow unbounded in size.  Many real-world examples 
exist to demonstrate the impracticality of including a multi-megabyte 
file in an IKE exchange.  This constraint is particularly acute in 
bandwidth limited environments (e.g. mobile communications).  The net 
effect is exclusion of in-band CRLs in favor of out-of-band (OOB) 
acquisition of these data, should they even be used at all.  

Reliance on OOB methods can be further complicated if access to 
revocation data requires use of IPSEC (and therefore IKE) to establish 
secure and authorized access to the CRLs of an IKE participant.  Such 
network access deadlock further contributes to a reduced reliance on 
certificate revocation status in favor of blind trust.

OCSP [RFC2560] offers a useful alternative.  The size of an OCSP 
response is bounded and small and therefore suitable for in-band IKEv2 
signaling of a certificate's revocation status.

This document defines two extensions to IKEv2 that enable the use of 
OCSP for in-band signaling of certificate revocation status.  Two new 
content encodings are defined for use in the CERTREQ and CERT payloads:  
OCSP Responder Hash and OCSP Response.  An OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ 
payload triggers transmission of an OCSP Response CERT payload. 

2.  Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Extension Definition

With reference to Section 3.6 of [IKEv2], the values for the Cert 
Encoding field of the CERT payload are extended as follows (see also 
the IANA Considerations section of this document):

            Certificate Encoding               Value
            --------------------               -----
            OCSP Responder Hash                 14
            OCSP Response                       15


Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

3.1	OCSP Responder Hash

A value of OCSP Responder Hash (14) in the Cert Encoding field of a 
CERTREQ Payload indicates the presence of an OCSP Responder certificate 
hash in the Certificate Authority field of the CERTREQ payload.

The presence of the OCSP Responder Hash in a CERTREQ message:

    1. identifies an OCSP responder trusted by the sender;

    2. notifies the recipient of sender's support for the
       OCSP extension to IKEv2; and

    3  notifies the recipient of sender's desire to receive OCSP
       confirmation in a subsequent CERT payload.

3.2  OCSP Response

A value of OCSP Response (15) in the Cert Encoding field of a CERT 
Payload indicates the presence of an OCSP Response in the Certificate 
Data field of the CERT payload.

Correlation between an OCSP Response CERT payload and a corresponding 
CERT payload carrying a certificate can be achieved by matching the 
OCSP response CertID field to the certificate.  See [RFC2560] for the 
definition of OCSP response content.

4.  Extension Requirements

[IKEv2] allows for multiple CERT and CERTREQ payloads in an exchange.

4.1  OCSP Responder Hash

Section 3.7 of [IKEv2] allows for the concatenation of trust anchor 
hashes as the Certification Authority value of a single CERTREQ 
message.  There is no means however to indicate which among those 
hashes relates to the certificate of a trusted OCSP responder.

Therefore an OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ SHALL be transmitted separate 
from any other CERTREQ payloads in an IKEv2 exchange.  

Where it is useful to identify more than one trusted OCSP responder, 
each such identification SHALL be transmitted via separate OCSP 
Responder Hash CERTREQ payloads.

The Certification Authority value in an OCSP Responder CERTREQ SHALL be 
computed and produced in a manner identical to that of trust anchor 
hashes as documented in Section 3.7 of [IKEv2] with the exception that 
each such hash SHALL be expressed in a separate CERTREQ payload.





Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

Upon receipt of an OCSP Response CERT payload corresponding to a prior 
OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ, the CERTREQ sender SHALL incorporate the 
OCSP response into path validation logic defined by [RFC3280].

The sender of an OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ SHALL abort an IKEv2 
exchange if either:

    1. the corresponding OCSP Response CERT payload indicates that the  
       subject certificate is revoked;

    2. the corresponding OCSP Response CERT payload indicates an OCSP
       error (e.g. malformedRequest, internalError, tryLater,
       sigRequired, unauthorized, etc.);

    3. a corresponding OCSP Response CERT payload is not received; OR

    4. a [TBD] IKEv2 error is received indicating inability to respond.
 
4.2  OCSP Response

Upon receipt of an OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ payload, the recipient 
SHALL either:

    1. acquire the related OCSP-based assertion and produce
       and transmit an OCSP Response CERT payload corresponding
       to the certificate needed to verify its signature on IKEv2 
       payloads; OR

    2. transmit a [TBD] IKEv2 error.

The recipient of an OCSP Responder Hash CERTREQ payload SHALL NOT 
ignore the request.  At a minimum, a [TBD] IKEv2 error SHALL be sent.

An OCSP Response CERT payload SHALL be transmitted separate from any 
other CERT payload in an IKEv2 exchange.

Where multiple OCSP responses are useful to an environment, each such 
SHALL be transmitted via separate OCSP Response CERT payloads.

The means by which an OCSP response may be acquired for production of 
an OCSP Response CERT payload is out of scope of this document.

The structure and encoding of the Certificate Data field of an OCSP 
Response CERT payload SHALL be identical to that defined in [RFC2560].

5.  Examples and Discussion

This section shows the standard IKEv2 message examples with both peers, 
the initiator and the responder, using public key based authentication, 
CERTREQ and CERT payloads.  The first instance corresponds to Section 
1.2 of [IKEv2], the illustrations of which are reproduced below for 
reference.


Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

5.1  Baseline

Application of the IKEv2 extensions defined in this document to the 
baseline exchange defined in Section 1.2 of [IKEv2] is as follows. 
Messages are numbered for ease of reference.

     Initiator                             Responder
     -----------                           -----------
(1)  HDR, SAi1, KEi, Ni               -->                                

(2)                                   <--  HDR, SAr1, KEr, Nr,
                                           CERTREQ(OCSP Responder Hash)
(3)  HDR, SK {IDi, CERT(certificate), -->
     CERT(OCSP Response),
     CERTREQ(OCSP Responder Hash),
     [IDr,] AUTH, SAi2, TSi, TSr} 

(4)                                   <--  HDR, SK {IDr,
                                           CERT(certificate),
                                           CERT(OCSP Response),
                                           AUTH, SAr2, TSi, TSr}

          Figure 1:  OCSP Extensions to Baseline IKEv2

In (2) Responder sends an OCSP Responder Hash CERTREq payload 
identifying an OCSP responder trusted by Responder.  In response, 
Initiator sends in (3) both a CERT payload carrying its certificate and 
an OCSP Response CERT payload covering that certificate.  In (3) 
Initiator also requests an OCSP response via the OCSP Responder Hash 
CERTREQ payload.  In (4) Responder returns its certificate and a 
separate OCSP Response CERT payload covering that certificate.

It is important to note that in this scenario, Responder in (2) is not 
yet in possession of Initiator's certificate and therefore cannot form 
an OCSP request. However, [RFC2560] allows for pre-produced responses.  
It is thus easily inferred that OCSP responses can be produced in the 
absence of a corresponding request (OCSP nonces notwithstanding).  In 
such instances OCSP Requests are simply index values into these data.

It is also important in extending IKEv2 towards OCSP in this scenario 
that Initiator have certain knowledge Responder is capable of and 
willing to participate in the extension.  Yet Responder will only trust 
one or more OCSP responder signatures.  These factors motivate the 
definition of OCSP Responder Hash extension.

5.2 Extended Authentication Protocol (EAP)

Another scenario of pressing interest is the use of EAP to accommodate 
multiple end users seeking enterprise access to an IPSEC gateway.  As 
with the preceding section, the following illustration is extracted 
from [IKEv2].  In the event of a conflict between this document and 
[IKEv2] regarding these illustrations, [IKEv2] SHALL dominate.


Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

     Initiator                            Responder
     -----------                          -----------
(1)  HDR, SAi1, KEi, Ni              -->                                

(2)                                  <--  HDR, SAr1, KEr, Nr

(3)  HDR, SK {IDi,                   -->
     CERTREQ(OCSP Responder Hash),
     [IDr,] AUTH, SAi2, TSi, TSr} 

(4)                                  <--  HDR, SK {IDr,
                                          CERT(certificate),
                                          CERT(OCSP Response),
                                          AUTH, EAP}

(5)       HDR, SK {EAP}              -->

(6)                                  <--    HDR, SK {EAP (success)}

(7)       HDR, SK {AUTH}             -->

(8)                                  <--    HDR, SK {AUTH, SAr2, TSi, 
                                            TSr }

              Figure 2: OCSP Extensions to EAP in IKEv2

In the EAP scenario, messages (5) through (8) are not relevant to this 
document.  Note that while [IKEv2] allows for the optional inclusion of 
a CERTREQ in (2), this document asserts no need of its use.  It is 
assumed that environments including this optional payload and yet 
wishing to implement the OCSP extension to IKEv2 are sufficiently 
robust as to accommodate this redundant payload.

6.  Security Considerations

For the reasons noted above, OCSP Responder Hash is used in place of 
OCSP request syntax to trigger production and transmission of an OCSP 
response.  OCSP as defined in [RFC2560] may contain a nonce request 
extension to improve security against replay attacks (see Section 4.4.1 
of [RFC2560] for further details).  The OCSP Responder Hash does not 
contain such a nonce.  But because the OCSP interaction is embedded in 
IKEv2, replay protection is nonetheless provided to the extent IKEv2 
mitigates such attacks on its exchanges.

6.  IANA Considerations

This document defines two new field types for use in the IKEv2 Cert 
Encoding field of the Certificate Payload format.  Official values for 
"OCSP Responder Hash" and "OCSP Response" extensions to the Cert 
Encoding table of Section 3.6 of [IKEv2] need to be acquired from IANA.




Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004

7.  References

7.1  Normative References

   [IKEv2]    Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol",
              draft-ietf-ipsec-ikev2-14 (work in progress), June 2004

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC2560]  Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A., Galperin, S. and 
              Adams, C., "X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure 
              Online Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP", RFC 2560, 
              June 1999

   [RFC3280]  Housley, R., Polk, W., Ford, W. and D. Solo, "Internet
              X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and
              Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 3280,
              April 2002.

Authors' Addresses

   Michael Myers
   TraceRoute Security LLC
   EMail: mmyers@fastq.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Siemens
   Otto-Hahn-Ring 6
   Munich, Bayern  81739
   Germany

   EMail: Hannes.Tschofenig@siemens.com

Intellectual Property Statement

The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has made 
any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information on the 
procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be found in BCP 
78 and BCP 79.

Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this specification 
can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
http://www.ietf.org/ipr.


Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         OCSP Extensions to IKEv2               June 2004


The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary rights 
that may cover technology that may be required to implement this 
standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
"AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject to 
the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and except 
as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
Internet Society.
























Myers & Tschofenig     Expires November 30, 2004               [Page 8]

