1. COPYRIGHT

Unless otherwise mentioned, the copyrights described in section 4,
below, apply to all files in this distribution.

2. BACKGROUND

Much of the code in this package was originally written by Miquel van
Smoorenburg <miquels@cistron.nl> for Cistron Internet Services B.V.  A
significant fraction of the code was written by others for the
FreeRADIUS Server Project.

3. INDIVIDUAL DIRECTORIES

3.1 doc/rfc/

Most of the files in this directory are copyrighted by the Internet
Society, Inc.  See the contents of the files for details.

3.2 src/lib/

Copyright for files in this directory is held by the contributors.
See the contents of the files for details

3.2.1 LICENSE

The license for all files in the src/lib directory is the GNU LGPL
version 2, which is included with this program in the file
src/lib/LICENSE.

3.3 libltdl/

Most of the files in this directory are copyright the Free Software
Foundation, Inc.  See the contents of the files for details.

4. ALL OTHER FILES

Copyright for files in this directory is held by the contributors.
See the contents of the files for details.  Files without explicit
copyright notices are copyright The FreeRADIUS Server Project.  See
section 4.2 for more information.

4.1 LICENSE

The license for all other source code and documentation except the
files in src/lib directory is the GNU GPL version 2, which is included
with this program in the LICENSE file in this directory.

4.2 LIST OF COPYRIGHT HOLDERS

Portions of the source code and documentation included here are
copyright by one or more of the following organizations and
individuals.  This list is not exhaustive.  Consult the individual
files for more detailed copyright statements.


Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 The FreeRADIUS
Server Project

Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Alan DeKok
<aland@ox.org>

Copyright (C) 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Free
Software Foundation, Inc.

Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005 Kostas Kalevras <kkalev@noc.ntua.gr>

Copyright (C) 2004  Cladju Consulting, Inc.

Copyright (C) 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Google, Inc.

Copyright (C) 2003, 2004  Michael Richardson <mcr@sandelman.ottawa.on.ca>

Copyright (C) 2002, 2003, 2004 Novell, Inc.

Copyright (C) 2002  Miguel A.L. Paraz <mparaz@mparaz.com>

Copyright (C) 2002 Simon Ekstrand <simon@routemeister.net>

Copyright (C) 2001  Chad Miller <cmiller@surfsouth.com>

Copyright (C) 2001 hereUare Communications, Inc.

Copyright (C) 2000 Jochen Friedrich <jochen@scram.de>

Copyright (C) 2000, 2002 Miquel van Smoorenburg

Copyright (C) 2000  Jeff Carneal <jeff@apex.net>

Copyright (C) 2000  Alan Curry <pacman@world.std.com>

Copyright (C) 2000  David Kerry <davidk@snti.com>

Copyright (C) 2000  Dmitri Ageev <d_ageev@ortcc.ru>

Copyright (C) 2000  Nathan Neulinger <nneul@umr.edu>

Copyright (C) 2000  Mike Machado <mike@innercite.com>

Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Chad Miller <cmiller@surfsouth.com>

Copyright (C) 1997, 1998, 1999 Cistron Internet Services B.V.

Copyright (C) 1999 Kunihiro Ishiguro <kunihiro@zebra.org>
